- Synced and corrected by Shazi89 -
- www.addic7ed.com -
This week on Vice: inside North Korea.
Advertise your product or brand here
contact www.OpenSubtitles.org today
I'm having a complete sensory overload.
I don't know whether to
laugh or cry or be scared.
And then, Somali refugees
return to rebuild their nation.
This street here is regularly bombed,
but it turns out there's
a juice shop open.
You guys got good vibes in here.
We have generations that
have seen nothing but war.
What we need now is human investment.
Go, go, go!
We are not animals!
Vice has been covering
North Korea for years,
and the country's relationship
with the United States
has never been as unpredictable
and as dangerous as it is right now.
The North is testing evermore
sophisticated ballistic missiles
that might soon be able
to reach American soil.
And the US has threatened military
intervention if provoked.
The Trump administration
is a new sheriff in town.
North Korea is a problem.
The problem will be taken care of.
As North Korea celebrated its
founder's birthday this year,
Vice and a few other news organizations
were invited to Pyongyang
to witness a military display
reminiscent of a
Stalinist May Day parade,
a show of force that experts have warned
could trigger a global nuclear war.
We arrived in Pyongyang as
part of a press delegation
invited by the government.
We were told only that
we were about to witness
a series of very
important announcements.
Outside of here, the world's
talking about North Korea
and what's going on here in big,
high-stakes terms.
So I was expecting slightly
more of a tense vibe,
but it's definitely
nowhere to be seen yet.
No fancy missiles or marches yet.
We've been told that
these thousands of people
are all just regular Pyongyang citizens.
What's most noticeable to me is
the kind of palpable, subdued,
quiet of everything.
The eerie tranquility
stood in sharp contrast
to the hysteria that was gripping
the news media everywhere else.
Commercial satellite imagery
shows activity at the test
site northeast of Pyongyang.
Meanwhile, Reuters reported
that foreign journalists
visiting North Korea
have been told to prepare for a, quote,
"big and important event" today.
As North Korean citizens themselves
were completely isolated
from these reports,
we awaited a mysterious announcement
from a very special surprise guest.
In a perfect example of the disconnect
between North Korea and
the rest of the world,
this supposed nuclear announcement
is actually the unveiling
of a new plaza.
This would set the tone for our stay.
Any visit here means,
at times, subjecting yourself
to the same information bubble
that North Koreans inhabit.
We begin with new
concerns that North Korea
could test-fire a nuclear
weapon any day now.
Japan today claiming that North Korea
may be capable of delivering missiles
equipped with sarin nerve gas.
And while we were out
here at a street opening,
the US was sending a very
powerful message to Pyongyang.
At around 7:00 p.m. local time
in Afghanistan last night,
the United States military
used a GBU-43 weapon in Afghanistan.
I wonder if maybe the
message on this MOAB
was, "Happy birthday, North Korea."
While the world news
talked of nuclear war,
our government minders took us
to something rather less threatening.
This trip to the Children's Palace
would be the first stop
on a sightseeing schedule
which is the staple of
any visit to North Korea.
A carefully curated PR tour
designed to give an impression
of stability and prosperity
in a place on the brink of war.
While the outside media speculated about
the supreme leader's march to war,
the international news teams here
were treated to an
elaborate musical recital
with dancing penguins, dry ice,
and a giant backdrop
of ballistic missiles.
As other foreign guests
danced with North Korean children,
the message became clear:
North Koreans are not only unaffected
by these external threats,
but wanted to show us that their society
and military were thriving.
At the Pyongyang Flower Festival,
we would see a unique mix
of nationalism and nuclear pride.
This is an exhibition center of flowers.
Namely, two types of flower,
which are named after
the founding father of
the DPRK and his son.
They are called the Kimilsungia,
and the Kimjongilia.
What's the significance of the rocket?
_
Flowers and rockets.
That one's a submarine-launched
ballistic missile.
_
Yeah, yeah.
While the outside world
pondered the regime's next steps...
While speculation has been growing
that North Korea may be ready to
carry out its sixth nuclear test...
... we were ushered through
a manufactured utopia
which included a zoo,
natural history museum,
and a high-end hair salon,
offering slight variations
of one government-approved haircut.
It's like a less-extreme version
of the supreme leader's.
As families swam and we
sipped lattes at a bar,
we had no idea what
was actually happening
in the rest of the world.
Or as we found out later,
what might be about to happen here.
We are sending an armada.
A very powerful armada
is on its way to Korea.
North Korea's getting ready
for another nuclear test,
but it could really happen
any day now, right?
In the event that nuclear
test does go ahead here,
the speculation is that
the US would respond
with some kind of tactical strike
with the aim of knocking out
some of North Korea's
nuclear capabilities,
which potentially could lead
to the most serious military escalation
between the two nations,
in modern times.
As talk mounted of the two countries
potentially coming to blows,
our minders took us to a metro station,
which is where citizens
are instructed to go
in the event of a nuclear attack.
This is one of the deepest
metros in the world.
It goes 150 meters underground,
and apparently doubles
as a bomb shelter.
This allowed us a rare chance
to reach behind the iron curtain
which surrounds North Korea,
and communicate directly
with its citizens.
Is this an exciting week in Pyongyang?
_
This week there's also escalating
tensions internationally,
especially between DPRK and America.
Are the effects of that felt here?
Is it making any difference
to the celebrations?
_
This sums up America's
relationship with North Korea.
Each sees the other as an
unrelenting adversary,
since both countries have limited access
to the other's point of view.
The bottom line is
North Korea's got to
change its behavior.
And as the West's hard-lined
rhetoric ramped up,
throughout the night, we could see
the mass mobilization
of military vehicles,
preparing for their
annual show of force.
The Day of the Sun celebration
commemorates the birthday
of North Korea's eternal
president, Kim Il-sung.
It also gives them the opportunity
to broadcast their
strength over the airwaves
with a public military parade.
So, I'm having a complete
sensory overload.
I don't know whether to laugh or cry
or be scared or entertained.
Like Stalin's Soviet marches,
the parade was a jaw-dropping display
of highly choreographed military might.
And much like those May
Day parades of the past,
this show of force was
aimed directly at the US
_
I believe we're watching
the first display
of North Korea's first-ever ICBMs
that are capable of reaching America.
As the senior politician
just claimed in his speech,
they will launch if provoked.
The North's claims to
have this capability
are disputed by experts.
But there is no doubting
the nationalist fervor
that unveiling missiles helps incite.
The parade kicked off
a dramatic escalation.
The following day,
the North conducted a failed,
though very real, missile test.
... following North
Korea's show of force,
failing in spectacular fashion.
Then, US Vice President Mike Pence
made a surprise visit to
the demilitarized zone
between North and South Korea.
We stand with the people of South Korea,
um, and all options are on the table.
And since then,
amidst increasingly bellicose rhetoric
on President Trump's Twitter feed,
yet more missile tests.
While the Western media was quick
to pounce on their launch failures,
only a short time later,
they successfully tested a missile
that experts believe
could strike the US.
Concrete proof that their technology
is years ahead of expectations,
has triggered an even stronger reaction
from the Trump administration.
As far as North Korea is concerned,
I have some pretty severe things
that we're thinking about.
Make no mistake,
North Korea's launch of an ICBM
is a clear and sharp
military escalation.
We had witnessed firsthand
how echo chambers,
without direct dialogue,
can help beat the drum to war.
We will defeat any attack,
and we will meet any use
of conventional or nuclear weapons
with an overwhelming
and effective response.
The question now
is how far are both sides willing to go
before a war of words
becomes something much more dangerous?
By most definitions,
Somalia is a failed state.
It's been ravaged by famine, civil war,
and become a base for piracy.
Most recently,
it's seen horrendous violence
by the terrorist group Al-Shabaab.
More than two million Somalis have fled
because of those factors,
including 150,000 who came to the US.
But today, many of these émigrés
are starting to return to Somalia
to try to fix their country for good.
Somalia hasn't had a
functioning government
in more than 25 years.
They've been plagued by
decades of civil war
and widespread terrorism.
Billions of dollars of international
support hasn't worked.
But today, there's a new source of hope:
the Somali diaspora.
Thousands of Somali
Westerners are returning.
Unlike foreigners, they have an
inherent commitment to this country,
and their Western education
and work experience
is unparalleled in the region.
We traveled to Southern Somalia,
devastated by severe drought,
where Somali-Canadian doctor, Hodan Ali,
is overseeing a medical
assessment and aid delivery.
We have a shipment brought by UNICEF,
and they have brought supplies
to deal with the acute outbreak
of watery diarrhea.
Because the town is completely
surrounded by Al-Shabaab,
all aid has to be flown in.
This is the community treatment center
for, um, acute watery diarrhea,
one of two facilities
in the entire region.
_
We left Somalia pre-civil war.
I have been blessed and privileged
to have lived the life that I've lived,
because we're talking about a society
that has not had formal education,
formal institutions, for over 25 years.
We have generations that
have seen nothing but war.
What we need now is investment,
human investment, human resources,
because we cannot depend on
international interventions.
Who... who is going to do it,
if people like myself don't do it?
Somalia's still a dangerous place.
There were several explosions
just in the last few days.
Why leave a comfortable,
safe life in Canada?
Somalia is definitely a dangerous place,
but I don't look at the danger.
I look at the potential and the need
that the country has.
After filming for just over an hour,
local Intel came in that Al-Shabaab,
known for targeting and
executing Westerners,
wasn't far away.
Apparently Al-Shabaab got
word that we're here,
and that aid just came into the town,
so we got to get out of here.
While Dr. Hodan's work in
the most desperate parts
of Somalia has been crucial,
back in Mogadishu,
she's attempting to build
Somalia's health care system
from the ground up.
Dr. Hodan just opened this
beautiful health center.
It's definitely an upgrade.
The facility really is a facility
for first... um, primary care services.
Preventative care,
chronic illnesses like
diabetes, hypertension,
which is really,
really on the rise here.
See, this bed here is a maternity bed,
but if you go to your
average clinic or hospital,
women don't have this type of bed.
The number one killer of Somali women
is postpartum hemorrhage.
A woman is about to go into labor,
they pray for her, for her return.
Because they know that's the
deadliest thing she could do.
Absolutely.
Now we're gonna go upstairs.
We have our quick
inpatient facility here
for folks who need
immediate rehydration.
Every room has a sink,
and we will be putting antiseptic soaps
and all the means to make sure that
people are cleaning their hands.
So, that seems pretty standard.
- You know, basic sanitation.
- Yes.
- How rare is it here?
- Very rare.
People who have come here have said,
"You know, this is different."
And that's the idea.
It needs to be different.
Not different that it is crazy,
out-of-this-world.
It's just basic services
that I would be providing
in... in Hamilton, Ontario, right?
Because at the end of the day,
it's... it's a place
that anything you do...
makes a difference.
But for a country with a
bloody history, like Somalia,
the first pillar to
restoring the country
is providing security.
We joined the Somali National Army
and AMISOM, the African
peacekeeping force,
widely credited with
stabilizing the country,
as they visited a
recently opened school.
Twenty-five years of anarchy,
we're not going to have
it solved overnight,
but with our partners from Africa,
the AMISOM, we've tried our best,
and I think you can see the results.
Did you live in the UK? Yes.
I hear that accent.
You're a diaspora, huh?
- Yes.
- Wow. Why did you return?
To serve my country.
Before AMISOM took over
for the dysfunctional Somali
National Army in 2007,
Al-Shabaab controlled most of Mogadishu
and much of the country.
Today, they're much weaker
and rely on one-off attacks.
During the Battle of Mogadishu in 2011,
AMISOM and the SNA
fought with Al-Shabaab
for control over a significant
national landmark,
the Mogadishu football stadium.
So, Al-Shabaab used to control
this whole stadium, this whole area,
and it was a big win for AMISOM
when they took it back.
_
The UPDF forces were the
first contingent to come.
The UPDF were also, at the time,
at a placed called Uruba.
That's the Uruba Hotel.
So, you now control all
of this and way beyond?
We are beyond this.
If Somalia was a no-go zone,
uh, a few years back,
today it's open, it's a normal country,
and slowly we are progressing.
The last ten years
have been years of
progress for this country.
The businesses and construction
popping up throughout the city
were encouraging signs of
the country rebuilding.
One very busy, unexpected
storefront caught our eye.
This street here is regularly bombed,
but it turns out there
is a juice shop open.
This is some of the most extreme
gentrification I've ever seen.
- Welcome.
- I like your sunglasses.
- All right. Thank you.
- You guys got good vibes in here.
Where I came from, the US,
where this kind of shop
actually was very popular.
Maybe I should try something like that,
and immediately it became a hit.
About 300 or 400 customers
visit this store every day.
- Wow.
- Yeah.
We know there's electronic
shops that actually do good.
There's a lot of travel agencies.
There's also a fashion shop
here called "Cadaani."
They want change, and that's actually
what we want to try to show
off to Mogadishu people,
that this is also a relatively safe city
where you can do business.
"Safety" is still a relative
term here in Mogadishu,
but the returning diaspora
that is fueling much of
the economic growth here
are determined to succeed.
Like Ahmed Jama,
who returned from the UK
to open the Village Restaurant,
a popular spot among Somali Westerners.
_
Ahmed's restaurants have
been attacked several times
by suicide bombers, active shooters,
and vehicle-borne IEDs.
But each time, he's reopened.
How do you stay safe when you're
running restaurants like this?
_
Right.
How's it going?
_
Why is it important to open
restaurants in a city like Mogadishu?
Yeah.
One of the most pressing needs
in a country decimated
by decades of civil war
is infrastructure.
We met up with a
Somali-American engineer
who offered to show us his new project,
a million-dollar investment.
Gianna. Nice to meet you.
Good! This does not look
like the rest of Mogadishu.
It feels like California.
You have butterflies in your garden.
Sell me one of these apartments.
Tell me why I should move here.
Sure.
Very nice.
So much natural light.
How many bedrooms, you said?
Wow, look at this.
You got the balcony and everything.
So, I gotta say, on this side,
it's amazing. You can see the ocean.
But the foreground is all
bombed-out buildings.
_
Yeah.
We asked Osman if financial opportunity
has factored into his
decision to move back.
Do you think you'd be making
the same amount of money?
_
Oh, so you don't pay taxes?
Diaspora are building up,
and now for the first time
in more than 25 years,
they're creating a
functioning government.
In February, the parliament elected
a Somali-American as president,
in a historic vote.
We visited Villa Somalia,
their version of the White House,
as the president announced
the 26 new ministers.
_
Sir? Hello, I'm Gianna.
Uh, national security. Congratulations.
Can I ask, are you a diaspora?
_
You are. From where?
- My name is Abdi.
- Abdi?
Which... what were you just appointed?
_
Okay. Congratulations.
Can I ask, are you a diaspora?
_
- The United States?
- I lived in Washington.
Eighty percent of the ministers
appointed here are diaspora
and their presence is
giving people hope.
But this shift toward Westernization
triggered Al-Shabaab's string
of attacks soon after.
About an hour after we
left Villa Somalia,
a bomb exploded at the front gates,
killing several people,
and many more went off in the
capital while we were there.
In what was meant to be an
attack against Al-Shabaab,
one of the ministers we met,
Abas Abdullahi Sheikh,
was shot and killed by security forces
shortly after we left the country.
But despite these attacks,
the diaspora have become
a formidable force
pushing back against extremism.
Part of what has fueled Al-Shabaab,
which translates to
"the youth" in Arabic,
is their ability to win the
hearts and minds of young people.
Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre
is an organization that
rehabilitates radicalized children,
aiming to end the cycle of violence.
_
Ilwad Elman is a
27-year-old Somali-Canadian
who left her safe life in Ottawa
to deradicalize Al-Shabaab
child soldiers.
These safe houses,
these are for children
that are still under threat.
Children that have been forcibly
recruited into Al-Shabaab,
managed to escape,
were then put into detention for being
forcibly recruited into Al-Shabaab,
and then used by government
security forces as informants.
But we believe that children
can become children again
if they are taken out of
these militarized contexts.
Mm-hmm.
And I've seen that hundreds
of times over again.
Ilwad does extremely dangerous work
and is the boldest example
of diaspora coming back.
In fact, her father paid with his life
for doing the same type of work.
So, my dad and my mom were both...
ardent human rights activists.
And... when the war started to escalate,
my mom and dad made a
decision that she would leave
with me and my sisters,
and my dad would stay behind.
I went back, just to understand
what the context was like,
and as soon as I did,
one month turned to three months,
turned to one year,
and now I'm here for seven years.
In order to rebuild,
there needs to be an investment
in the young people.
By investing in young people,
we will not have...
hundreds of people taking on
the Mediterranean Sea every single year,
trying to think that the only way
for a good life is outside of Somalia.
I want to show them the
opportunities that are here.
And it just starts with
actually giving someone hope.
- Synced and corrected by Shazi89 -
- www.addic7ed.com -
Support us and become VIP member
to remove all ads from www.OpenSubtitles.org